[CUBRIDMAN-197] modify the description about notes and constraints for dblink (#466)
CUBRID/cubrid-manual: en/sql/dblink.rst

    For detailed DBLink SQL syntax, refer to :doc:`/sql/query/select` and :doc:`/sql/schema/server_stmt`.

Notice
======

> *   Synonym creation: Local synonyms can be created for remote tables and remote synonyms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   Synonym creation: Local synonyms can be created for remote tables and remote synonyms. In the case of DBMSs other than CUBRID, the user name or db name must be added to the original table name.

```

.. code-block:: sql

    -- for CUBRID
    create synonym synonym_1 for t1@srv1;
    create synonym synonym_2 for remote_synonym@srv1;

    -- for ORACLE
    create synonym synonym_ora for user_ora.t1@srv_ora;

    -- for MySQL and MariaDB
    create synonym synonym_my for my_db.t1@srv_mysql;
    create synonym synonym_maria for maria_db.t1@srv_maria;

*   Reserved word processing: When using a reserved word in the remote DB as an identifier, it must be enclosed in square brackets ([ ]) along with the reserved word processing characters in the remote DB.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reserved word processing character for CUBRID is the double quotation mark (" ") as like the following.
```

.. code-block:: sql

    SELECT ["COLUMN"],["ADD"],["ALTER"] FROM ["TABLE"]@srv1 ;
    SELECT * FROM dblink(srv1, 'select "COLUMN","ADD","ALTER" from "TABLE" ') AS t(a varchar, b varchar, c varchar );

> *   The character used to use reserved words as identifiers in Oracle is the double quotation mark (" ") character.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   The reserved word processing character for ORACLE is the double quotation mark (" ") as like the following.

```

.. code-block:: sql

    SELECT ["COLUMN"],["ADD"],["ALTER"] FROM ["TABLE"]@srv1 ;
    SELECT * FROM dblink(srv1, 'select "COLUMN","ADD","ALTER" from "TABLE" ') AS t(a varchar, b varchar, c varchar );

> *   The character used to use reserved words as identifiers in MySQL and MariaDB is the backquote (\` \`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   The reserved word processing character for MySQL and MariaDB is the backquote (\` \`) as like the following.

```

.. code-block:: sql

    SELECT [`COLUMN`],[`ADD`],[`ALTER`] FROM [`TABLE`]@srv1 ;
    SELECT * FROM dblink(srv1, 'select `COLUMN`,`ADD`,`ALTER` from `TABLE` ') AS t(a varchar, b varchar, c varchar );

Constraints
===========

Common Constraints
------------------

> *   The charset of the remote database used in DBLink supports only utf-8.

Reviewer: How about changing as like the following ?
The charset of the remote database must be unicode (utf-8).

Author: Ok.

> *   Table extension format (object@server)

Reviewer: How about changing "format" to "style" ?

Author: Ok.

        -   Supports only tables, views, and synonyms
        -   Serial, built-in functions, and stored functions are not supported.

>             (Example: sp_func() stored function of remote server (server1) cannot be used in sp_func@server1(arg1, …) format.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            (Example: stored function (sp_func()) of remote server (server1) cannot be used in sp_func@server1(arg1, …) format.)

```

> *   All functions of the SELECT query (built-in functions, stored functions, including SYSDATE), serial-related functions, and system constants all operate locally (if a function or serial is executed in a remote DB, the DBLINK statement must be used)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   All functions (stored functions, built-in functions including SYSDATE), serial-related functions  and system constants in the SELECT query all operate locally. (If you need to execute a function or serial in a remote DB, you should use the DBLINK statement.)

```

>     For example, when a select query is made targeting the remote table as below, only the queries in DBLINK() among the rewritten queries are executed in the remote DB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For example, when the select query for remote table is requested and the optimizer rewrite query as below, you look the queries in DBLINK() are only executed in the remote DB.

```

.. code-block:: sql

    SELECT A.*, rownum rn, '' empty, null null_col, SYSDATE
    FROM t1@srv1 A ;
    -- rewritten query

    SELECT A.id, A.parentid, A.[text], rownum, '', null, SYS_DATE -- at local
    FROM ( SELECT [_dbl].id, [_dbl].parentid, [_dbl].[text]
           FROM DBLINK( srv1 /* '192.168.1.125:33000:remotedb1:dba:*:' */ ,
                  'SELECT * FROM tree A') AS [_dbl](id integer, parentid integer, [text] varchar(32)) -- at remote
         ) A (id, parentid, [text])

> *   All functions of INSERT/UPDATE/DELETE/MERGE queries, serial-related functions, and system constants are executed on the remote server, so be careful when using built-in functions (i.e., CUBRID's built-in functions may not be supported by the remote DBMS or have different usage instructions)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   All functions, serial-related functions, and system constants of INSERT/UPDATE/DELETE/MERGE queries are all executed on the remote server, so be careful when using built-in functions (i.e., CUBRID's built-in functions may not be supported by the remote DBMS or have different usage instructions)

```

> *   Transaction: Transactions (commit, rollback) between local DB and remote DB are not processed as one transaction. DML (INSERT/UPDATE/DELETE/MERGE syntax) queries in the remote DB are excuted as auto commits separately from transactions in the local DB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   Transaction: Transactions (commit, rollback) between local DB and remote DB are not processed as one transaction. DML (INSERT/UPDATE/DELETE/MERGE) queries in the remote DB are excuted as auto commits separately from transactions in the local DB.

```

>     As in the example below, when performing a query, data is inserted into the remote DB, but it is rolled back and no data is entered into the local DB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    As in the example below, when performing a transaction, data is inserted into the remote DB, but no data is entered into the localDB, because  do rollback.

```

.. code-block:: sql

    -- local input
    INSERT INTO t1(a, b) VALUES (1, 'local');

    -- remote input
    INSERT INTO t2@srv1(a, b) VALUES (1, 'remote');

    rollback;

    SELECT a, b FROM t1, t2@srv1 t2 WHERE t1.a = t2.a;
    there’s no result

*   TRUNCATE statement is not supported.
*   CREATE TABLE … LIKE table@server syntax is not supported (For reference, CREATE TABLE … AS SELECT FROM table@server syntax is supported)

> *   dblink() and remote table (@server) are not supported in the TRIGGER statement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   dblink() and remote table (@server) are not allowed in the TRIGGER statement.

```

> *   predicate push: The SELECT statement written in table extension format (@server) syntax is internally rewritten as DBLINK() syntax. To improve performance, it is rewritten by pushing conditional clauses that can be processed into the query to be performed in the remote DB. However, if a built-in function or user-defined function in a conditional clause is used, it is excluded from push.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   predicate push: The SELECT statement written in table extension format (@server) is internally rewritten to  DBLINK() by the optimizer. To improve performance, It push with conditional clauses that can be performed in the remote DB. However, if a built-in function or user-defined function in a conditional clause is used, it is excluded from pushing.

```

*   Performance notes

    .. note::

>         When the connect by clause, group by clause, having clause, and limit clause are used in the SELECT statement in table extension format (@server), the where condition, group by clause, having clause, and limit clause are not executed in the remote DB. After tranferring to the local DB, performance may be slowed by performing tasks that meet the conditions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        When the connect by clause, group by clause, having clause, and limit clause are used in the SELECT statement in table extension format (@server), the where condition, group by clause, having clause, and limit clause are not executed in the remote DB. After executing exclude the statement in the remote DB and sending the performed results to the local DB, performance may be slowed due to execute the statement in the local DB.

```

>     Below is an example of processing the group by clause after transferring all data from the remote DB's tree table to the local DB in order to process count().

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Below is an example of processing the group by and count() after transferring all data from the remote DB's tree table to the local DB.

```

    .. code-block:: sql

        -- original query
        SELECT A.parentid, count()
        FROM tree@srv1 A
        GROUP BY A.parentid ;
        -- rewritten query
        SELECT A.parentid, count()
        FROM ( SELECT [_dbl].parentid
               FROM DBLINK( srv1 /* '192.168.1.125:33000:remotedb1:dba::' */,
                            'SELECT parentid FROM tree A'
                          ) AS [_dbl](parentid integer)
             ) A (parentid)
        GROUP BY A.parentid

> *   The SYSDATE function used in the table extension format (@server) syntax is performed in the local DB, so caution is required if the time between servers is different.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   The SYSDATE function used in the table extension format (@server) is performed in the local DB, so caution is required if the time between servers is different.

```

    .. code-block:: sql

        -- original query
        SELECT * FROM tbl@srv1 WHERE col1 >= sysdate;
        -- rewritten query
        SELECT *
        FROM ( SELECT col1, col2
               FROM DBLINK( srv1 /* '192.168.1.125:33000:remotedb1:dba::' */,
                            'SELECT col1, col2 FROM tbl'
                          ) AS [_dbl](col1 date, col2 varchar)
             ) tbl (col1, col2)
        WHERE col1>= SYS_DATE

> *   When using a scalar subquery with a co-related condition in the table extension format (@server) syntax, a subquery, or a SELECT query with an EXIST statement, the remote query brings the entire data to the local DB every time and performs the task of finding data corresponding to the join column. As a result, a rapid decrease in performance occurs. The example below uses T1.a as a condition for a scalar subquery, and is a query that finds suitable data by bringing all the data from svr1's tree table as much as T1.a < 4 to the local DB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   When using a scalar subquery, subquery and EXIST clause  with a co-related condition in the table extension format (@server),  the remote query brings the whole data to the local DB every time and performs to find data corresponding to the join column.  As a result, a rapid decrease in performance occurs. The example below uses T1.a as a condition for a scalar subquery, and all data as T1.a < 4 of svr1's tree table is sent to the local DB to find suitable data per executing scalar subquey, so it may slow performance.

```

    .. code-block:: sql

        -- original query
        SELECT T1.a,
               (SELECT A.text FROM tree@srv1 A WHERE A.id = T1.a ) remote_text
        FROM hangul_t1 T1
        WHERE T1.a < 4;

        -- rewritten query
        SELECT T1.a,
               (SELECT A.[text] from (select [_dbl].[text], [_dbl].id
                FROM DBLINK(srv1 /* '192.168.1.125:33000:remotedb1:dba::' */,
                            'SELECT [text], id FROM tree A'
                           ) AS [_dbl]([text] varchar(32), id integer)
                WHERE [_dbl].id=T1.a) A ([text], id))
        FROM hangul_t1 T1
        WERE (T1.a < ?:0)

CUBRID Constraints
------------------
*   ENUM, BLOB, CLOB, and SET types are not supported in the select statement.

> *   If the set parameters of the local DB and remote DB are different, undesirable results may occur.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   If the system parameters of the local DB and remote DB are different, undesirable results may occur.

```

.. note::

>     Heterogeneous DBMS common constraints

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Common constraints of Heterogeneous DBMS

```

    *   The gateway must use the Unicode-only ODBC Driver of the heterogeneous remote database (Oracle/MySQL/MariaDB).

>     *   Among ODBC types, SQL_INTERVAL, SQL_GUID, SQL_BIT, SQL_BINARY, SQL_VARBINARY, and SQL_LONGVARBINARY are not supported types. (graph)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *   Among ODBC types, SQL_INTERVAL, SQL_GUID, SQL_BIT, SQL_BINARY, SQL_VARBINARY, and SQL_LONGVARBINARY are not supported types.

```

>     *   The maximum string length for one column is only 16M.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *   The maximum string length for one column is 16M.

```

>     *   In DML statements such as INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE, and MERGE, if the built-in functions not supported by CUBRID are not in the form of function (parameter 1, …, parameter N) as shown below, a query error occurs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *   In DML statements such as INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE, and MERGE, if the built-in functions not supported by CUBRID and are not in the form of function (parameter 1, …, parameter N) as below, the query occurs error.

```

        Example: the convert function of MySQL and MariaDB: convert('binary' using binary)

.. note::
    Oracle Constraints

    *   Long, interval day to se, interval year to month, blob, and clob types are not supported in the select statement.

>     *   Oracle ODBC does not support the time zone type, so when searching time zone data, the part representing the time zone is calculated as the local time, converted to timestamp type, and returned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *   Oracle ODBC does not support the time zone type, so when selecting time zone data, the time zone is calculated as the local time,  converted to timestamp type, and returned.

```

.. code-block:: sql

    SELECT [`COLUMN`],[`ADD`],[`ALTER`] FROM [`TABLE`]@srv1 ;
    SELECT * FROM dblink(srv1, 'select `COLUMN`,`ADD`,`ALTER` from `TABLE` ') AS t(a varchar, b varchar, c varchar );

Constraints
===========

Common Constraints
------------------

*   The charset of the remote database must be unicode (utf-8).
*   Table extension style (object@server)
        -   Supports only tables, views, and synonyms
        -   Serial, built-in functions, and stored functions are not supported.

            (Example: stored function sp_func() of remote server (server1) cannot be used in sp_func@server1(arg1, …) format.)
*   All functions (stored functions, built-in functions including SYSDATE), serial-related functions and system constants in the SELECT query all operate locally. (If you need to execute a function or serial in a remote DB, you should use the DBLINK statement.)
    For example, when the select query for remote table is requested and the optimizer rewrite query as below, you look the queries in DBLINK() are only executed in the remote DB.

.. code-block:: sql

    SELECT A.*, rownum rn, '' empty, null null_col, SYSDATE

>     FROM t1@srv1 A ;
>     -- rewritten query
> 
>     SELECT A.id, A.parentid, A.[text], rownum, '', null, SYS_DATE -- at local

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    FROM t1@srv1 A ;
    
    -- rewritten query
    SELECT A.id, A.parentid, A.[text], rownum, '', null, SYS_DATE -- at local

```

         ) A (id, parentid, [text])

*   All functions, serial-related functions, and system constants of INSERT/UPDATE/DELETE/MERGE queries are all executed on the remote server, so be careful when using built-in functions (i.e., CUBRID's built-in functions may not be supported by the remote DBMS or have different usage instructions)
*   Transaction: Transactions (commit, rollback) between local DB and remote DB are not processed as one transaction. DML (INSERT/UPDATE/DELETE/MERGE) queries in the remote DB are excuted as auto commits separately from transactions in the local DB.
    As in the example below, when performing a transaction, data is inserted into the remote DB, but no data is entered into the local DB, because doing rollback.

.. code-block:: sql

    -- local input
    INSERT INTO t1(a, b) VALUES (1, 'local');

    -- remote input
    INSERT INTO t2@srv1(a, b) VALUES (1, 'remote');

    rollback;

    SELECT a, b FROM t1, t2@srv1 t2 WHERE t1.a = t2.a;
    there’s no result

*   TRUNCATE statement is not supported.
*   CREATE TABLE … LIKE table@server syntax is not supported (For reference, CREATE TABLE … AS SELECT FROM table@server syntax is supported)

> *   dblink() and remote table (@server) are not allowed in the TRIGGER statement.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*   DBLINK() and remote table (@server) are not allowed in the TRIGGER statement.

```

Reviewer 2: Not modified yet.

*   predicate push: The SELECT statement written in table extension format (@server) is internally rewritten to  DBLINK() by the optimizer. To improve performance, It push with conditional clauses that can be performed in the remote DB. However, if a built-in function or user-defined function in a conditional clause is used, it is excluded from pushing.
*   Performance notes

    .. note::
        When the connect by clause, group by clause, having clause, and limit clause are used in the SELECT statement in table extension format (@server), the where condition, group by clause, having clause, and limit clause are not executed in the remote DB. After executing exclude the statement in the remote DB and sending the performed results to the local DB, performance may be slowed due to execute the statement in the local DB.

    Below is an example of processing the "*group by*" and "*count()*" after transferring all data from the remote DB's *tree* table to the local DB.

    .. code-block:: sql

        -- original query
        SELECT A.parentid, count()
        FROM tree@srv1 A

>         GROUP BY A.parentid ;
>         -- rewritten query

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        GROUP BY A.parentid ;
        
        -- rewritten query

```

Reviewer 2: Not modified yet.

        SELECT A.parentid, count()
        FROM ( SELECT [_dbl].parentid
               FROM DBLINK( srv1 /* '192.168.1.125:33000:remotedb1:dba::' */,
                            'SELECT parentid FROM tree A'
                          ) AS [_dbl](parentid integer)
             ) A (parentid)
        GROUP BY A.parentid

*   The SYSDATE function used in the table extension format (@server) is performed in the local DB, so caution is required if the time between servers is different.

    .. code-block:: sql

        -- original query

>         SELECT * FROM tbl@srv1 WHERE col1 >= sysdate;
>         -- rewritten query

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        SELECT * FROM tbl@srv1 WHERE col1 >= sysdate;
        
        -- rewritten query

```

*   If the system parameters of the local DB and remote DB are different, undesirable results may occur.

.. note::
    Common constraints of Heterogeneous DBMS.

    *   The gateway must use the Unicode-only ODBC Driver of the heterogeneous remote database (Oracle/MySQL/MariaDB).
    *   Among ODBC types, SQL_INTERVAL, SQL_GUID, SQL_BIT, SQL_BINARY, SQL_VARBINARY, and SQL_LONGVARBINARY are not supported types.
    *   The maximum string length for one column is 16M.
    *   In DML statements such as INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE, and MERGE, if the built-in functions not supported by CUBRID and are not in the form of function (parameter 1, …, parameter N) as below, the query results error.

        Example: the convert function of MySQL and MariaDB: convert('binary' using binary)

.. note::
    Oracle Constraints

    *   Long, interval day to se, interval year to month, blob, and clob types are not supported in the select statement.
    *   Oracle ODBC does not support the time zone type, so when SELECTing time zone data, the time zone is calculated as a local time, converted to timestamp type, and returned.

>     Below is an example of converting Oracle DB's time zone data to a local time zone when querying it with ODBC.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Below is an example of converting Oracle DB's time zone data to a local time zone when querying it with ODBC. The entered time zone is "+02:00", converted to local time zone "+09:00", and output as "PM 08:00".

```

    .. code-block:: sql

        -- oracle input

>         INSERT INTO tbl VALUES (to_timestamp_tz('2021-07-25 12:34:56 +02:00', 'yyyy-mm-dd hh24:mi:ss tzh:tzm'));
>         -- local

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        INSERT INTO tbl VALUES (to_timestamp_tz('2021-07-25 12:34:56 +02:00', 'yyyy-mm-dd hh24:mi:ss tzh:tzm'));
        
        -- local

```

        SELECT t_timestamp_timezone2 FROM tbl@server;
        07:34:56.000 PM 07/25/2021
        SELECT to_char(t_timestamp_timezone2, 'yyyy-mm-dd hh24:mi:ss.ff tzh:tzm') FROM tbl@server;
        2021-07-25 19:34:56.000 +09:00
        The entered time zone is "+02:00", converted to local time zone "+09:00", and output as "PM 08:00".

>         The entered time zone is "+02:00", converted to local time zone "+09:00", and output as "PM 08:00".

Reviewer 2: remove

*   Transaction: Transactions (commit, rollback) between local DB and remote DB are not processed as one transaction. DML (INSERT/UPDATE/DELETE/MERGE) queries in the remote DB are excuted as auto commits separately from transactions in the local DB.
    As in the example below, when performing a transaction, data is inserted into the remote DB, but no data is entered into the local DB, because doing rollback.

.. code-block:: sql

    -- local input
    INSERT INTO t1(a, b) VALUES (1, 'local');

    -- remote input
    INSERT INTO t2@srv1(a, b) VALUES (1, 'remote');

    rollback;

    SELECT a, b FROM t1, t2@srv1 t2 WHERE t1.a = t2.a;
    there’s no result

*   TRUNCATE statement is not supported.
*   CREATE TABLE … LIKE table@server syntax is not supported (For reference, CREATE TABLE … AS SELECT FROM table@server syntax is supported)
*   DBLINK() and remote table (@server) are not allowed in the TRIGGER statement.

> *   predicate push: The SELECT statement written in table extension format (@server) is internally rewritten to  DBLINK() by the optimizer. To improve performance, It push with conditional clauses that can be performed in the remote DB. However, if a built-in function or user-defined function in a conditional clause is used, it is excluded from pushing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   predicate push: The SELECT statement written in table extension style (@server) is internally rewritten to  DBLINK() by the optimizer. To improve performance, It push with conditional clauses that can be performed in the remote DB. However, if a built-in function or user-defined function in a conditional clause is used, it is excluded from pushing.

```

*   Performance notes

    .. note::

>         When the connect by clause, group by clause, having clause, and limit clause are used in the SELECT statement in table extension format (@server), the where condition, group by clause, having clause, and limit clause are not executed in the remote DB. After executing exclude the statement in the remote DB and sending the performed results to the local DB, performance may be slowed due to execute the statement in the local DB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        When the connect by clause, group by clause, having clause, and limit clause are used in the SELECT statement in table extension style (@server), the where condition, group by clause, having clause, and limit clause are not executed in the remote DB. After executing exclude the statement in the remote DB and sending the performed results to the local DB, performance may be slowed due to execute the statement in the local DB.

```

    Below is an example of processing the "*group by*" and "*count()*" after transferring all data from the remote DB's *tree* table to the local DB.

    .. code-block:: sql

        -- original query
        SELECT A.parentid, count()
        FROM tree@srv1 A
        GROUP BY A.parentid ;

        -- rewritten query
        SELECT A.parentid, count()
        FROM ( SELECT [_dbl].parentid
               FROM DBLINK( srv1 /* '192.168.1.125:33000:remotedb1:dba::' */,
                            'SELECT parentid FROM tree A'
                          ) AS [_dbl](parentid integer)
             ) A (parentid)
        GROUP BY A.parentid

> *   The SYSDATE function used in the table extension format (@server) is performed in the local DB, so caution is required if the time between servers is different.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   The SYSDATE function used in the table extension style (@server) is performed in the local DB, so caution is required if the time between servers is different.

```

    .. code-block:: sql

        -- original query
        SELECT * FROM tbl@srv1 WHERE col1 >= sysdate;

        -- rewritten query
        SELECT *
        FROM ( SELECT col1, col2
               FROM DBLINK( srv1 /* '192.168.1.125:33000:remotedb1:dba::' */,
                            'SELECT col1, col2 FROM tbl'
                          ) AS [_dbl](col1 date, col2 varchar)
             ) tbl (col1, col2)
        WHERE col1>= SYS_DATE

> *   When using a scalar subquery, subquery and EXIST clause  with a co-related condition in the table extension format (@server),  the remote query brings the whole data to the local DB every time and performs to find data corresponding to the join column.  As a result, a rapid decrease in performance occurs. The example below uses T1.a as a condition for a scalar subquery, and all data as T1.a < 4 of svr1's tree table is sent to the local DB to find suitable data per executing scalar subquey, so it may degrade performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   When using a scalar subquery, subquery and EXIST clause  with a co-related condition in the table extension style (@server),  the remote query brings the whole data to the local DB every time and performs to find data corresponding to the join column.  As a result, a rapid decrease in performance occurs. The example below uses T1.a as a condition for a scalar subquery, and all data as T1.a < 4 of svr1's tree table is sent to the local DB to find suitable data per executing scalar subquey, so it may degrade performance.

```
